add a blog post about the crypto/tls QUIC API (#89)
libp2p/blog: src/_blog/cryptotls.md

---
tags:
- quic
- go
- standard library
- crypto/tls
title: Adding a QUIC API for Go's standard library TLS package
description:
date: 2023-08-15
permalink: "/2023-08-15-quic-crypto-tls/"
translationKey: ''
header_image: /quic-crypto-tls.png
author: Marten Seemann
---

# Adding a QUIC API for Go's standard library TLS package

> You might have [heard us talk about this before](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aDHymXQJ4bs): QUIC has become the most important transport in libp2p. For example, in the IPFS network, QUIC connections account for 80-90% of all connections. [quic-go](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go) is a QUIC implementation written in pure Go that is not only used in go-libp2p, but also in [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com/), a full-featured webserver (for its HTTP/3 support), [Adguard](https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome), for providing DNS over QUIC, and in the synchronization tool [syncthing](https://github.com/syncthing/syncthing/), and [many other projects](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go#projects-using-quic-go).

Reviewer: > in the IPFS network, QUIC connections account for 80-90% of all connections

1. Can we cite our source?  Maybe we can link to one of the new "public dashboards"?
2. Given the [broad definition of what IPFS is](https://specs.ipfs.tech/architecture/principles/), I think we should specify what we mean by the "IPFS network".  Maybe say "For example, QUIC accounts for 80-90% of the connections made to PL-run bootstrappers participating in the public IPFS DHT"

Author: Done.

> You might have [heard us talk about this before](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aDHymXQJ4bs): QUIC has become the most important transport in libp2p. For example, QUIC accounts for 80-90% of the connections made to PL-run bootstrappers participating in the public IPFS DHT (see our [public go-libp2p dashboard](https://protocollabs.grafana.net/public-dashboards/2bd3f1bee9964d40b6786fbe3eafd9fc?orgId=1)). [quic-go](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go) is a QUIC implementation written in pure Go that is not only used in go-libp2p, but also in [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com/), a full-featured webserver (for its HTTP/3 support), [Adguard](https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome), for providing DNS over QUIC, and in the synchronization tool [syncthing](https://github.com/syncthing/syncthing/), and [many other projects](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go#projects-using-quic-go).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You might have [heard us talk about this before](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aDHymXQJ4bs): QUIC has become the most important transport in go-libp2p. For example, QUIC accounts for 80-90% of the connections made to PL-run bootstrappers participating in the public IPFS DHT (see our [public go-libp2p dashboard](https://protocollabs.grafana.net/public-dashboards/2bd3f1bee9964d40b6786fbe3eafd9fc?orgId=1)). [quic-go](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go) is a QUIC implementation written in pure Go that is not only used in go-libp2p, but also in [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com/), a full-featured webserver (for its HTTP/3 support), [Adguard](https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome), for providing DNS over QUIC, and in the synchronization tool [syncthing](https://github.com/syncthing/syncthing/), and [many other projects](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go#projects-using-quic-go).
```

Is it really the most important in libp2p or go-libp2p; there's a difference. Of the 12 libp2p implementations, how many support quic apart from Go and Rust? I don't think this claim is the right one to make

Author: 12 implementations? That's a very optimistic to count them. But if you want to go down that route, there are even some QUIC-only libp2p implementations among them, for example zig-libp2p.

I think this statement is broader than just the respective implementations. QUIC is the transport that we're optimizing for when designing new protocols / new features. It's nice if a new feature _somehow_ works on TCP, but QUIC is the thing we care about.

Reviewer 2: zig is not widely deployed though. I still strongly favor you stating "QUIC is becoming the most important transport in libp2p" - I think this is more accurate given that it is in the process of being enabled in the Beacon chain.

Author: "is becoming" sgtm

2. Every time there was a security-related fix in crypto/tls, users had to update to a new (patch) release of quic-go as well.
3. Since the layout of the configuraiton structs in crypto/tls could change in future Go versions, quic-go had to restrict the Go versions that could be used to build quic-go. This lack of forwards-compatibility prompted regular complaints from users.

## Solving the Problem once and for all

To tackle this situation, we joined forces with Filippo Valsorda, a former member of Google’s Go team. Although he has left the company he is still maintaining crypto/tls and other crypto packages in the standard library. Filippo—now a full-time maintainer—is sponsored by Protocol Labs for his remarkable [open-source work](https://words.filippo.io/full-time-maintainer/).

Our first joint endeavor established an API for crypto/tls that enables QUIC implementations to use crypto/tls; detailed in this [GitHub issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/44886). This new API was designed to only support the normal (1-RTT) QUIC handshake, not the 0-RTT handshake; more on that below.

> After long discussions—both over Zoom and on the GitHub issue—we arrived at a much cleaner proposal than our homegrown qtls API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After long discussions—both over calls and on the GitHub issue—we arrived at a much cleaner proposal than our homegrown qtls API.
```
Do we need to name it?

Author: Good point.

This means that crypto/tls needed to support adding data to session tickets, both the client and server sides. It turned out that the API required for this would also solve a large number of other longstanding [issues related to session tickets](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60105).

This is only one of the problems we had to solve to make 0-RTT work. Another complication arises from the fact that the server can reject 0-RTT for any reason; typically for DoS protection or because it doesn’t consider the QUIC transport parameters acceptable anymore. In that case, 0-RTT packets are discarded and the handshake continues as a regular (1-RTT) QUIC handshake. This necessitated a new [API for deciding about 0-RTT rejection](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60107) and for clients to be informed of it.

## Current Status

> After an intense period of collaboration and development, we are thrilled to have all these changes included in the Go 1.21 release. The implementation of these proposals in the standard library was performed by [Damien Neil](https://github.com/neild) and [Filippo Valsorda](https://github.com/FiloSottile). On the quic-go side, we made use of the new APIs as soon as the changes were published. This allowed us to use quic-go's test suite to stress-test the implementation. This was really valuable, since quic-go’s test suite is quite extensive and covers a large number of corner cases. And it indeed found a small issue, which we subsequently [fixed](https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/498215).

Reviewer: Link to the test suite?

Author: Not sure what we'd link here. It's the tests within the quic-go repository.

And while we have a small workaround for one remaining [issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60506), we are hopeful of a resolution in the next release.

> The newly introduced changes have been released in [quic-go v0.37](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go/releases/tag/v0.37.0), and in [go-libp2p v0.30](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p/releases/tag/v0.30.0). We anticipate that these changes will work seamlessly once users update their dependencies and compiler version, but please let us know if you run into any problems!

Reviewer: Describe how to let us know?  (file a go-libp2p issue?)

Is it worth emphasizing again that a consumer can now perform go-libp2p updates independent of go updates?

Author: Done.

---
tags:
- quic
- go
- standard library
- crypto/tls
title: Adding a QUIC API for Go's standard library TLS package
description:
date: 2023-08-15
permalink: "/2023-08-15-quic-crypto-tls/"
translationKey: ''
header_image: /quic-crypto-tls.png
author: Marten Seemann
---

# Adding a QUIC API for Go's standard library TLS package

> You might have [heard us talk about this before](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aDHymXQJ4bs): QUIC has become the most important transport in libp2p. For example, in the IPFS network, QUIC connections account for a whopping 80-90% of the connections. go-libp2p uses [quic-go](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go), a QUIC implementation written in pure Go. quic-go not only powers QUIC support in go-libp2p, but also in [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com/), a full-featured webserver (for its HTTP/3 support), [Adguard](https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome) (for providing DNS over QUIC), and in the synchronization tool [syncthing](https://github.com/syncthing/syncthing/), and [many other projects](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go#projects-using-quic-go).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You might have [heard us talk about this before](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aDHymXQJ4bs): QUIC has become the most important transport in libp2p. For example, in the IPFS network, QUIC connections account for 80-90% of all connections. [quic-go](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go) is a QUIC implementation written in pure Go that is not only used in go-libp2p, but also in [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com/), a full-featured webserver (for its HTTP/3 support), [Adguard](https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome), for providing DNS over QUIC, and in the synchronization tool [syncthing](https://github.com/syncthing/syncthing/), and [many other projects](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go#projects-using-quic-go).
```
I think this is clearer.

## QUIC and TLS 1.3

> QUIC uses TLS 1.3 to secure the connection. There’s no such thing as an unencrypted QUIC connection! However, due to running on top of UDP (the unreliable and unordered), QUIC's interactions with the TLS stack differs from how a TLS connection on top of TCP would look like. The details are described in [RFC 9001](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9001.html). When QUIC was standardized, it became necessary for all TLS stacks across languages to expose new APIs. For the longest time, the Go standard library TLS package (crypto/tls) lacked an API for this purpose. quic-go had no choice but to fork crypto/tls to add the required APIs themselves.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All QUIC connections use TLS 1.3 to encrypt the messages. There’s no such thing as an unencrypted QUIC connection! However, due to running on top of UDP—the unreliable and unordered Internet protocol—QUIC's interactions with the TLS stack differs from how a TLS connection on top of TCP functions. The details are described in [RFC 9001](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9001.html). When QUIC was standardized, it became necessary for all TLS stacks across languages to expose new APIs. For the longest time, the Go standard library TLS package (crypto/tls) lacked an API for this purpose. The quic-go project had no choice but to fork crypto/tls to add the required APIs themselves.
```

> To complicate matters, the quic-go API aimed to accept a regular `tls.Config` (the struct used to configure the behavior of a TLS connection, defining, among others, the TLS certificates to use), not a type exposed by our TLS fork. This was to ensure that users of the library didn't have to create separate configs for their TCP/TLS servers and their QUIC servers. This is a pretty common use case, e.g. when running HTTP/3 and HTTP/2 in parallel. To meet this requirement, quic-go had to use the dreaded `unsafe` package to convert between `qtls.Config` and `tls.Config`. And since there was no guarantee that the layout of these structs would remain constant between Go releases (in fact, they did change quite frequently), quic-go had to create a new fork of crypto/tls for every new Go version (every 6 months).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To complicate matters, the quic-go API aimed to accept a regular `tls.Config`—the struct used to configure the behavior of a TLS connection, defining, among others, the TLS certificates to use—not a type exposed by our TLS fork. This was to ensure that users of the library didn't have to create separate configs for their TCP/TLS servers and their QUIC servers. This is a pretty common use case such as when running HTTP/3 and HTTP/2 in parallel. To meet this requirement, quic-go used the dreaded `unsafe` package to convert between `qtls.Config` and `tls.Config`. And since there was no guarantee that the layout of these structs would remain constant between Go releases—in fact, they did change quite frequently—quic-go had to create a new fork of crypto/tls for every new Go version every 6 months.
```

This meant:

1. A lot of extra effort for us every time a new Go version was released. Applying the changes to the fork could get quite complicated, if there were lots of changes in crypto/tls.

> 2. Every time there was a security-related fix in crypto/tls, users had to to update to a new (patch) release of quic-go as well.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Every time there was a security-related fix in crypto/tls, users had to update to a new (patch) release of quic-go as well.
```

3. Since the layout of the configuraiton structs in crypto/tls could change in future Go versions, quic-go had to restrict the Go versions that could be used to build quic-go. This lack of forwards-compatibility prompted regular complaints from users.

## Solving the Problem once and for all

> To tackle this situation, we joined forces with Filippo Valsorda, a former member of Google’s Go team. Although he has left the company since, he’s still maintaining crypto/tls and some other crypto packages in the standard library. Filippo, now a full-time maintainer, is sponsored by Protocol Labs for his remarkable [open-source work](https://words.filippo.io/full-time-maintainer/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To tackle this situation, we joined forces with Filippo Valsorda, a former member of Google’s Go team. Although he has left the company he is still maintaining crypto/tls and other crypto packages in the standard library. Filippo—now a full-time maintainer—is sponsored by Protocol Labs for his remarkable [open-source work](https://words.filippo.io/full-time-maintainer/).
```

> Our first joint endeavor was to establish an API for crypto/tls that would enable QUIC implementations to use crypto/tls, detailed in this [GitHub issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/44886). This new API was designed to only support the normal (1-RTT) QUIC handshake, not the 0-RTT handshake (more on that below). 0-RTT allows clients to resume connections to servers they have previously connected to, and to send application data right in the first flight.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Our first joint endeavor established an API for crypto/tls that enables QUIC implementations to use crypto/tls; detailed in this [GitHub issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/44886). This new API was designed to only support the normal (1-RTT) QUIC handshake, not the 0-RTT handshake; more on that below.
```

> After long discussions (both over Zoom and on the GitHub issue), we arrived at a proposal that was much cleaner than our homegrown qtls API.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After long discussions—both over Zoom and on the GitHub issue—we arrived at a much cleaner proposal than our homegrown qtls API.
```

> Adding support for 0-RTT was a fairly large endeavor. This is because the TLS and the QUIC stack need to coordinate quite a lot to enable this feature. For example, both the client and the server need to remember certain configuration parameters (called QUIC transport parameters) from the original QUIC connection. Among others, these transport parameters include values like flow control windows (i.e. how many bytes a client is allowed to send on a newly established stream) and how many streams the client is allowed to open. This information is needed for the client to stay within these limits when resuming a connection. The server typically encrypts these values and stores them in the session ticket. When the client restores the session, it sends the session ticket to the server (as part of the TLS ClientHello message), allowing the server to restore the transport parameters (without having to persist them after a connection closes!). The client also needs to store some its parameters alongside the ticket, so it can restore them when resuming the session.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
0-RTT allows clients to resume connections to servers they have previously connected to and send application data in an encrypted first packet. Adding support for 0-RTT was a fairly large endeavor. This is because the TLS and the QUIC stacks must coordinate quite a lot to enable this feature. For example, both the client and the server need to remember certain configuration parameters—called QUIC transport parameters—from the original QUIC connection. Among others, these transport parameters include values like flow control windows (i.e. how many bytes a client is allowed to send on a newly established stream) and how many streams the client is allowed to open. This information is needed for the client to stay within these limits when resuming a connection. The server typically encrypts these values and stores them in the session ticket. When the client restores the session, it sends the session ticket to the server—as part of the TLS ClientHello message—allowing the server to restore the transport parameters without having to persist them after a connection closes!. The client also needs to store some of its parameters alongside the ticket, so it can restore them when resuming the session.
```

This means that crypto/tls needed to support adding data to session tickets, both the client and server sides. It turned out that the API required for this would also solve a large number of other longstanding [issues related to session tickets](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60105).

> This is only one of the problems we had to solve to make 0-RTT work. Another complication arises from the fact that the server can reject 0-RTT for any reason (typically DoS protection or because it doesn’t consider the QUIC transport parameters acceptable anymore). In that case, 0-RTT packets are discarded and the handshake continues as a regular (1-RTT) QUIC handshake. This necessitated a new [API for deciding about 0-RTT rejection](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60107) and for clients to be informed of it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is only one of the problems we had to solve to make 0-RTT work. Another complication arises from the fact that the server can reject 0-RTT for any reason; typically for DoS protection or because it doesn’t consider the QUIC transport parameters acceptable anymore. In that case, 0-RTT packets are discarded and the handshake continues as a regular (1-RTT) QUIC handshake. This necessitated a new [API for deciding about 0-RTT rejection](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60107) and for clients to be informed of it.
```

## Current Status

> After an intense period of collaboration and development, we are thrilled to have all these changes included in the Go 1.21 release. The implementation of these proposals in the standard library was performed by Damien Neil and Filippo Valsorda. On the quic-go side, we made use of the new APIs as soon as the changes were published. This allowed us to use quic-go's test suite to stress-test the implementation. This was really valuable, since quic-go’s test suite is quite extensive and covers a large number of corner cases. And it indeed found a small issue, which we subsequently [fixed](https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/498215).

Reviewer 4: I think you should make "Damien Niel" and "Filippo Valisorda" links to their respective GH accounts.

And while we have a small workaround for one remaining [issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60506), we are hopeful of a resolution in the next release.

> The newly introduced changes have been released in quic-go v0.37 (TODO: link), and in go-libp2p (TODO: insert version). We anticipate that these changes will work seamlessly once users update their dependencies and compiler version, but please let us know if you run into any problems!

Reviewer 4: `(TODO: link)` and `(TODO: insert version)`

Reminder

Reviewer 4: > ...but please let us know if you run into any problems...

By filing an issue in our GH project? emailing us at... ? What is the specific call to action?

Author: Updated the links.

I don't think this is a specific call to action. Just a reminder that we're responsive to bug reports, using the usual channels.

## A few words on the Go team’s QUIC efforts

It looks like the Go team has started working on [their own QUIC implementation](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/58547). As we know from the 8-year journey implementing quic-go, writing a performant QUIC stack is a massive undertaking. And we’re not done yet, we’re still investing significant resources into optimizing it. 

> We have [offered](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/58547#issuecomment-1463211376) to use quic-go as a basis for the standard library implementation, and even made a [concrete proposal](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/58547#issuecomment-1569583646) how it could be used to add HTTP/3 support to the net/http package. Unfortunately, the Go team has never reached out to us, or taken up our proposal to jump on a call to evaluate the feasibility of this approach.

Reviewer 4: This sounds like you're accusing the Go team of being mean/not doing their job. I'm not sure it is wise to put this kind of pressure on them.

Author: I removed the entire section.

---
tags:
- quic
- go
- standard library
- crypto/tls
title: A QUIC API for crypto/tls
description:
date: 2023-08-15
permalink: "/2023-08-15-quic-crypto-tls/"
translationKey: ''
header_image: /quic-crypto-tls.png
author: Marten Seemann
---

> # A QUIC API for crypto/tls

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# A QUIC API for crypto/tls
```
Should we make it more clear this is in Go?

Author: I've updated the title. Suggestions for a better one welcome.

> You might have heard us talk about this before: QUIC has become the most important transport in libp2p. For example, in the IPFS network, QUIC connections account for a whopping 80-90% of the connections. go-libp2p uses [quic-go](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go), a QUIC implementation written in pure Go. quic-go doesn’t only power QUIC support in go-libp2p, but also in [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com/), a full-featured webserver (for its HTTP/3 support), [Adguard](https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome) (for providing DNS over QUIC), and in the synchronization tool [syncthing](https://github.com/syncthing/syncthing/), and [many other projects](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go#projects-using-quic-go).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You might have [heard us talk about this before](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aDHymXQJ4bs): QUIC is beginning to surpass TCP as the most important non-browser transport in libp2p. For example, in the IPFS network, QUIC connections account for a whopping 80-90% of the connections. go-libp2p uses [quic-go](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go), a QUIC implementation written in pure Go. quic-go doesn’t only power QUIC support in go-libp2p, but also in [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com/), a full-featured webserver (for its HTTP/3 support), [Adguard](https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome) (for providing DNS over QUIC), and in the synchronization tool [syncthing](https://github.com/syncthing/syncthing/), and [many other projects](https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go#projects-using-quic-go).
```

Is the first sentence in reference to https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aDHymXQJ4bs ? 

> QUIC has become the most important transport in libp2p

to "QUIC is beginning to surpass TCP as the most important non-browser transport in libp2p"
wdyt? While it's true for IPFS/Filecoin & go-libp2p, there are other projects and implementations that don't use QUIC yet (Ethereum, etc.)

> "whopping 80-90% of the connections"

link?

Author: Link would be the swarm metrics, once we have our Grafana instance up and running. 80-90% is way more than "beginning to surpass" though.

> 

Reviewer 2: "Therefore, as a primary maintainer of both quic-go and go-libp2p, today I'd like to share my perspective and the journey of adding the QUIC api." I think this suffices

> 

Author: This sounds good. I added it. Thank you @p-shahi!

## QUIC and TLS 1.3

> QUIC uses TLS 1.3 to secure the connection. There’s no such thing as an unencrypted QUIC connection! However, due to running on top of UDP (unreliable and unordered), QUIC's interactions with the TLS stack differs from how a TLS connection on top of TCP would look like. The details are described in [RFC 9001](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9001.html). When QUIC was standardized, it became a necessity for all TLS stacks across languages to expose new APIs. For the longest time, the Go standard library TLS package (crypto/tls) lacked an API for this purpose. quic-go had no choice but to fork crypto/tls to add the required APIs ourselves.

Reviewer 5: At this point it's not clear that quic-go = go-libp2p = PL so _ourselves_ comes as a surprise here.

```suggestion
QUIC uses TLS 1.3 to secure the connection. There’s no such thing as an unencrypted QUIC connection! However, due to running on top of UDP (unreliable and unordered), QUIC's interactions with the TLS stack differs from how a TLS connection on top of TCP would look like. The details are described in [RFC 9001](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9001.html). When QUIC was standardized, it became a necessity for all TLS stacks across languages to expose new APIs. For the longest time, the Go standard library TLS package (crypto/tls) lacked an API for this purpose. quic-go had no choice but to fork crypto/tls to add the required APIs themselves.
```

> QUIC uses TLS 1.3 to secure the connection. There’s no such thing as an unencrypted QUIC connection! However, due to running on top of (the unreliable, unordered) UDP, QUIC's  interactions with the TLS stack is quite different from how a TLS connection on top of TCP would look like. The details are described in [RFC 9001](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9001.html). When QUIC was standardized, it became a necessity for all TLS stacks across languages to expose new APIs. For the longest time, the Go standard library TLS package (crypto/tls) lacked an API for this purpose. We had no choice but to fork crypto/tls to add the required APIs ourselves.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
QUIC uses TLS 1.3 to secure the connection. There’s no such thing as an unencrypted QUIC connection! However, due to running on top of UDP (unreliable and unordered), QUIC's interactions with the TLS stack differs from how a TLS connection on top of TCP would look like. The details are described in [RFC 9001](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9001.html). When QUIC was standardized, it became a necessity for all TLS stacks across languages to expose new APIs. For the longest time, the Go standard library TLS package (crypto/tls) lacked an API for this purpose. quic-go had no choice but to fork crypto/tls to add the required APIs ourselves.
```

> we had no choice

to "quic-go had no choice"
On a related note: the acknowledgment that you maintain quic-go should be added (perhaps in the intro)

> fork crypto/tls

link?

> To complicate matters, the quic-go API aimed to accept a regular `tls.Config` (the config struct used to configure the behavior of a TLS connection, defining, among others, the TLS certificates to use), not a type exposed by our TLS fork. This was to ensure that users of the library didn't have to create separate configs for their TCP/TLS servers and their QUIC servers. This is a pretty common use case, e.g. when running HTTP/3 and HTTP/2 in parallel. To meet this requirement, we had to use the dreaded `unsafe` package to convert between `qtls.Config` and `tls.Config`. And since there was no guarantee that the layout of these structs would remain constant between Go releases (in fact, they did change quite frequently), we had to create a new fork of crypto/tls for every new Go version (every 6 months).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To complicate matters, the quic-go API aimed to accept a regular `tls.Config` (the struct used to configure the behavior of a TLS connection, defining, among others, the TLS certificates to use), not a type exposed by our TLS fork. This was to ensure that users of the library didn't have to create separate configs for their TCP/TLS servers and their QUIC servers. This is a pretty common use case, e.g. when running HTTP/3 and HTTP/2 in parallel. To meet this requirement, we had to use the dreaded `unsafe` package to convert between `qtls.Config` and `tls.Config`. And since there was no guarantee that the layout of these structs would remain constant between Go releases (in fact, they did change quite frequently), we had to create a new fork of crypto/tls for every new Go version (every 6 months).
```

> To complicate matters, the quic-go API aimed to accept a regular `tls.Config` (the config struct used to configure the behavior of a TLS connection, defining, among others, the TLS certificates to use), not a type exposed by our TLS fork. This was to ensure that users of the library didn't have to create separate configs for their TCP/TLS servers and their QUIC servers. This is a pretty common use case, e.g. when running HTTP/3 and HTTP/2 in parallel. To meet this requirement, we had to use the dreaded `unsafe` package to convert between `qtls.Config` and `tls.Config`. And since there was no guarantee that the layout of these structs would remain constant between Go releases (in fact, they did change quite frequently), we had to create a new fork of crypto/tls for every new Go version (every 6 months).

Author: Yeah, that makes sense. I reworded a couple of sentence so we don't need a "we" at all.

This meant:

1. A lot of extra effort for us every time a new Go version was released. Applying the changes to the fork could get quite complicated, if there were lots of changes in crypto/tls.
2. Every time there was a secruity-related fix in crypto/tls, we had to ask our users to update to a new (patch) release of quic-go as well.
3. Since we couldn’t know how crypto/tls would look in future Go versions, we had to restrict the Go versions that could be used to build quic-go. This lack of forwards-compatibility prompted regular complaints from users who weren’t familiar with the internals of quic-go.

> This was not an ideal situation, but given the nature of QUIC, we had little choice.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This was not an ideal situation, but given the benefits of QUIC, we had little choice.
```

Not sure about this. Maybe some other wording to suggest that we chose this tradeoff because of the benefits of QUIC not because we were forced to.

## Solving the Problem once and for all

To tackle this situation, we joined forces with Filippo Valsorda, a former member of Google’s Go team. Although he has left the company since, he’s still maintaining crypto/tls and some other crypto packages in the standard library. Filippo, now a full-time maintainer, is sponsored by Protocol Labs for his remarkable [open-source work](https://words.filippo.io/full-time-maintainer/).

> Our first joint endeavor was to establish an API for crypto/tls that would enable QUIC implementations to use crypto/tls, detailed in this [GitHub issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/44886). This new API was designed to only support the normal (1-RTT) QUIC handshake, not the 0-RTT handshake (more on that below). 0-RTT allows clients to resume connections to servers they have previously connected to, and to send application data right in the first flight.

Reviewer 6: You say "More on that below", but then explain 0-rtt. Maybe save the explanation for when you talk more about 0-rtt?

> After long discussions (both over Zoom and on the GitHub issue), we arrived at a proposal that was much cleaner than our homegrown qtls API.

Reviewer 6: which was?

Author: Done.

> Adding support for 0-RTT was a fairly large endeavor. This is because the TLS and the QUIC stack need to coordinate quite a lot to enable this feature. For example, both the client and the server need to remember certain configuration parameters (called QUIC transport parameters) from the original QUIC connection. Among others, these transport parameters include values like flow control windows (i.e. how many bytes a client is allowed to send on a newly established stream) and how many streams the client is allowed to open. This information is needed for the client to stay within these limits when resuming a connection. The server typically encrypts these values and stores them in the session ticket. When the client restores the session, it sends the session ticket to the server (as part of the TLS ClientHello message), allowing the server to restore the transport parameters (without having to store them at all!). Of course, the client also needs to store some its parameters alongside the ticket, so it can restore them when resuming the session.

Reviewer 6: Suggestion
"without having to store them at all!" -> "without having to persist them after a connection closes"

Reviewer 6: " Of course, the client" -> "The client also"

Author: Applied.

> This means that crypto/tls needed to support adding data to session tickets, both the client and server sides. It turned out that the API required for this would solve also solve a large number of other longstanding [issues related to session tickets](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60105).

Reviewer 7: Redundant solve

> This means that crypto/tls needed to support adding data to session tickets, both the client and server sides. It turned out that the API required for this would solve also solve a large number of other longstanding [issues related to session tickets](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60105).

Reviewer 6: Make this the same paragraph as the previous one. It's a continuation of the previous sentence.

> This is only one of the problems we had to solve to make 0-RTT work. Another complication arises from the fact that the server can reject 0-RTT for any reason (typically DoS protection or because it doesn’t consider the QUIC transport parameters acceptable anymore). In that case, 0-RTT packets are discarded and a regular QUIC handshake. This necessitated a new [API for deciding about 0-RTT rejection](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60107) and for clients to be informed of it.

Reviewer 5: > In that case, 0-RTT packets are discarded and a regular QUIC handshake.

Not a native speaker but this sounds like the second part needs a verb. "In that case, 0-RTT packets are discarded and a regular QUIC handshake <verb>."

Author: Thanks. Fixed.

> This is only one of the problems we had to solve to make 0-RTT work. Another complication arises from the fact that the server can reject 0-RTT for any reason (typically DoS protection or because it doesn’t consider the QUIC transport parameters acceptable any more). In that case, 0-RTT packets are discarded andand a regular QUIC handshake. This necessitated a new [API for deciding about 0-RTT rejection](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60107) and for clients to be informed of it.

Reviewer 7: Double and

> This is only one of the problems we had to solve to make 0-RTT work. Another complication arises from the fact that the server can reject 0-RTT for any reason (typically DoS protection or because it doesn’t consider the QUIC transport parameters acceptable any more). In that case, 0-RTT packets are discarded andand a regular QUIC handshake. This necessitated a new [API for deciding about 0-RTT rejection](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60107) and for clients to be informed of it.

Reviewer 6: This was only one...

Reviewer 6: "..and a regular QUIC handshake." ? This sentence leaves the reader hanging.

Author: Fixed.

## Current Status

> After an intense period of collaboration and development, we are thrilled to have all these changes included in the Go 1.21 release. The implementation of these proposals in the standard library was performed by Damien Neil and Filippo Valsorda. On the quic-go side, we made use of the new APIs as soon as the CLs (Google-speak for pull requests) were published. This allowed us to use quic-go's test suite to stress-test the implementation. This was really valuable, since quic-go’s test suite is quite extensive and covers a large number of corner cases. And it indeed found a small issue, which we subsequently [fixed](https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/498215).

Reviewer 6: "as the CLs (Google-speak for pull requests) were published" -> "as the changes were published"

Author: Applied.

And while we have a small workaround for one remaining [issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/60506), we are hopeful of a resolution in the next release.

> The newly introduced changes have been released in quic-go v0.37 (TODO: link), and in go-libp2p (TODO: insert version). We anticipate that these changes will work seamlessly once users update their dependencies and compiler version. Please let us know if you run into any problems!

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The newly introduced changes have been released in quic-go v0.37 (TODO: link), and in go-libp2p (TODO: insert version). We anticipate that these changes will work seamlessly once users update their dependencies and compiler version, but please let us know if you run into any problems!
```

> ## A few words on the Go team’s QUIC efforts

Reviewer 6: Not sure I would include this.

Reviewer 6: Ah I see you mentioned this in the body
> I'm not 100% sure if we should include the last paragraph here. It doesn't contain a lot that we haven't said publicly (mostly on the QUIC GitHub issue), but do we want to surface it here?

I would vote to get rid of this.

Author: Removed.
